Opera

What I learnt: How big data is being used to analyse analyse effects

 At Opera I was on the product manager track in the global financial markets team. Our main product was a cloud-based application suite, Mobiuss, which enabled portfolio construction, valuation and risk Management for mortgage markets. I had many different responsibilities related to the product as well as the research:

1.  I was responsible for managing its database and optimizing data loading. I learnt SQL and further developed my database management skills, which would invaluable for working with any Oxera project where maintaining a database is required.

2.  I prepared the user manual and oversaw UI design for one of the product offerings. User-friendliness and good presentation is one of the key requirements of any client-facing report, and thus would my experience would be useful at Oxera.

3. As part of the publicly available research published by the company,  I did a study on the impact of Hurricane Sandy on US Bond Markets using Monte Carlo simulations and data from Hurricane Katrina as benchmark. I learn how analysis can be conducted using simulation. Since many economic experiments cannot be carried out practically, simulation would be powerful tool in economic case studies at Oxera.



Opera:

S: At Opera I was in the Global Financial Markets team.  We had a product called Mobiuss which was a Cloud Based Software as a Sevice platform enabling Portfolio Construction, Valuation and Risk Management for mortgage markets. 

[There were three different products for three customer segments (Mobiuss Resi for Residential Whole Loans, Mobiuss RMBS, CRE for Commercial Real Estate) (Basically clients would upload a portfolio of loans, or mbs, and they could see how they would perform in the future - under different scenarios, and see their valuation. For loans portfolios you could predict attributes defaults, delinquencies, loss severity, prepayment etc.]

 Besides, we also published monthly reports based on whatever signals we obtained from the data. 

T:  I was on the product manager track which meant that I had many different responsibilities related to the product as well as the research. 

A: 

Prepared Mockups for UI and worked with the design team for Mobiuss Ressi. Prepared User Manual
Managed the Database. Saw that the Monthly Data Loads went on track. We had third party vendors which we sourced huge amounts of data from. Optimised the scripts for monthly data loads if possible.
Worked on Sandy Research

T:

Hurricane Sandy caused severe damage in New York and NJ area in October 2012. We had instituted a surveillance dashboard to  monitor the performance of the deals and loans from the neighbourhoods most affected by flooding . How the deals will perform in the future was modelled using Katrina as benchmark which hit Louisiana in 2005.

( heavy flood damage that displaced much of the population, resulting in a huge increase in severe delinquencies that remained above baseline levels for two years. Counteracting the spike in delinquencies was a corresponding surge in prepayments, mainly driven by government disaster relief and insurance payouts. As a result, there were smaller peaks in foreclosures and subsequent liquidations that nevertheless produced some stress on bond cash flows. The timing of the prepayment and foreclosure peaks is similar .Prepayments returned to pre-Katrina levels within 12 months, as did foreclosures, but delinquencies persisted at elevated levels for another year. .)


A: (zip codes superimposed with post storm flooding survey map, 6B$ was exposed. 45 deals identified with a certain threshold exposure). Identified the deals, loaded them on the dashboard, and ran them through our credit model. 

R:  60+ delinquency rates  increased as expected. However the! size of the increase was a fraction of what was experienced after Katrina in 2005. Delinquency rates increased by 10%  and! 15%. By contrast, the same figure for Katrina was at 1100%. So it was unlikely the effect was as severe.


I was offered a full time position based on my work. More importantly, I learnt how business intelligence capability within an organization is built, picked up useful database management and project management skills, potentially useful for data-driven projects at Oxera.




RMBS

A residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) is a reference to the general package of financial agreements that typically represents cash yields that are paid to investors and that are supported by cash payments received from homeowners who pay interest and principal according to terms agreed to with their lenders; it is a funding instrument created by the "originator" or "sponsor" of the mortgage loan; without cross-collateralizing individual loans and mortgages (because it would be impossible to receive permission from individual homeowners), it is a funding instrument that pools the cash flow received from individuals and pays these cash receipts out with waterfall priorities that enable investors to become comfortable with the certainty of receipt of cash at any point in time.