OXFORD



To put it succinctly, Oxford presented an opportunity to have a broadening experience.

The long answer is that in made sense from both a professional and personal perspective.

Professionally, While IIT Delhi had provided me with a strong technical education, reading PPE at Oxford has given me a kind of macro-perspective on society and economy. 

The socratic method-like approach of the tutorial system is a totally different ball game from the class room based, top-down, didactic method of instruction at IIT Delhi, and it has manifoldly improved both my presentation and communication skills. 
rom puzzles with fixed answers to open-ended essays, 
 from programming to writing
 from problem solving to argumentation
 from slow, long drawn out research to assessing an argument quickly and thinking critically on your feet
 from depth to breadth

Personally, the global culture has contributed tremendously to my personal growth. 
3. At Oxford you meet people from from all kinds of cultures, all international backgrounds, all ages and ethnicities, pursuing every possible intellectual or extra curricular endeavour you can think of. It is cosmopolitan in the true sense, and the exposure one gets here is unparalleled.
4. For the first time I’ve gotten to really know the customs, cuisines, dances, and politics of so many different countries.
5. By viewing it from outside, I have also developed a new understanding of Indian and Western cultures.

it being my first ever extended stay abroad,I learnt a lot, not just from new academic and cosmopolitan environment, but also from the little adjustments I was to make. (The new dress codes , The language barriers and accent barriers, soft things- individualism, the laws of a new country, the drinking culture, complete change from a primarily vegetarian to a meat heavy diet, and many other little things (like addressing professors by their first names) 

In my one year here, I’ve socialised and travelled extensively. I’ve enjoyed productive, thought-provoking conversations, every single day, over dinner table, in society gatherings or elsewhere. I’ve gone on hiking, camping and road trips. And I’ve learnt myriad other little things along the way.

Diversity: Of countries, cultures, experiences, subjects and opinions. Differing starting points, and different view about how society could organise, overwhelming abundance of knowledge and experiences to draw from. Deliberative Debates in JCR.

Personal growth: Why I think the way I do, How I think, what I value and what not, where my talents lie much more aware of that (Surrounded by diversity and folks that are always challenging you, intellectually)

Interesting Philosophical Questions studied:

What is freedom? 
What is the liberal conception of the good life?  
What is authority?  How different societies in history solve the problem of authority: Greek, Roman, etc.? What is the distinction between totalitarianism, authoritarianism, and dictatorship, between power and authority?
What counts as a nation? Evolution of nationalism and its different models -  latin american, state enforced, colonial. 
What is justice? Do we owe duties to our fellow citizens which we do not to the rest of the world? 
Why reduce economic inequality? 
Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem: The proofs themselves and their impact, particularly on Hilbert’s program. 
Logicism: Is Maths just logic?


Politics of different countries

Britain
US
Colombia (Ingrid Betancourt, Julian, Isabel)
Lebanon (Confessionalism)
Pakistan (Hina Rabani, Head of ISI)
Uruguay (Pepe Mujica)
Palestine (Duja) - Israelis conflict
Catalonian Independence
Puerto Rico and US
German History


Food

Mole Poblano (Mexican)
Mansaf (Palestinian)
Lebanese Mezze
English Ales
Coffee (Papua New Guinea, Cafetier, Filter Coffee)
Italian Pastas
Thai Cuisine (Banana in Sugar, Tom Yum)

 
Language and Accents: 
Bulgarian Cyrillic Alphabet (Nogo si Hubawa, Koppel. Nozdrave) and Accents (Scottish, Italian, Russian etc.), 
German Phrases (Du hast wunderschöne augen, zu best hilfreiche, has du tomato auf den Augen, ich mach mich auf den Socken, German phrase to head to your vocabulary: " unter einer Decke stecken" (literally: to be stuck underneath the same blanket; meaning: plotting something), ze hat das geize etwas), Thai (Tim Suwahl, Hognam, Kapkhoonkhap, Sawadeekhap, Mai pen rai, Cau thot ) 
Arab (Yella)
Italian Sign Language
China (Mei Nu)

Nature and Community: 
First Aid Courses
Hiking and Camping: Trips to Lake District, Exmoor, North York Moors and Snowdonia
Stargazing, Perseids and Lyrids Meteor Showers

Travelling: Road Trip to Iceland (Land of Ice and Fire, Intense Food, Northern Lights), Cultural Study Trip to Thailand (Politics, Economy, Food, Religion), Wimbledon (Roger Federer, Petra Kvitova, Jankovic, Murray), Stonehenge, Winchester, Bath, Windsor (Cumberland Lodge), Hogmanay and Loch Ness, 

Sports and Physical Activities
Rowing (Christchurch Regatta, Day out in Olympic Lake at Eton-Dorney, 10+ Outings on River Thames,  Gym Training 3 Days a Week)
Croquet on HMC quads
Pool
Swimming
Hillwalking (Scafell Pike with 20kg Backpacks e.g.)

Hobbies:  Impov, Wine, University Challenge, Dance  (Ceilidh, Salsa, Serbian, Zouk and Samba)

Leisure: 
30+ Formal Dinners
Plays: As You Like It at the Globe, Singing in the Rain, A West Side Story
All night movie marathon Wes Anderson
Film Soc (9 Queens - Argentinian, Welcome to the Sctis French, The Wind Rises Japanese, Leviathan Russian, Haxan - Danish)
Punting on the River Cherwell (6+ Outings)
Architecture, Fashion and Photography

Community is not about homogeneity of backgrounds, or views, or even values.  Community is about mutual respect, its about empathy, its about giving. Vasudeva Kutumbaka.