As a BRCA club secretary. 
* I learnt  how to tackle bureaucracy, and adapt to it. I used to worry about getting the relevant permissions, spent a lot of time in writing applications,  following protocols which I'd have expected my secy to follow had I been the president. If hes not asking for it, you dont have to give him a reason to ask for it. At the same time, you have to maintain a balance.and maintain integrity and be accountable to yourself
* Punctuality. When you are accountable to a thousand or more students, you cant be late
* Getting the work done is sometimes more important than getting it done the way you want

Secy Lessons

- More inclusive is not always good
- Efficient working in heavily bureaucratic environs

Story: Conflict with QC Winners over Prize Money

S:  IIT Delhi has an annual cultural festival called Rendezvous which is funded by corporate sponsors. In 2010, as the secretary of the Quiz Society I was incharge of organising the all the quizzes (6 events) in the festival, each event involving cash prizes worth Rs. 20000. However, the budget was the overall festival was heavily mismanaged by the the finance and marketing team, and the deals struck with the sponsors left us at the wrong end of the bargain (For e.g, many companies got away by fulfilling their end of the deal through company vouchers instead of cash.) As a result, it was only after the events that I was told that there were no funds available for the prize money promised to the winners. 

T: I was the face of the Quiz Society, and I was to ensure that its reputation remains intact. The prize winners had to be conveyed the information that there were to be no cash prizes as advertised, and in such a way that they don’t feel cheated. Plus many winners were from quiz societies of other colleges, and it is important to maintain good relations with these for mutual banefit - to ensure we are not barred from their events and they continue participating in ours. 


A:
I wrote each team an email, thanking them for their participation. In the emails I was fully transparent and explained what had happened with the financial team and Quiz Society’s predicament. People care about fairness more than reward, they are fine with settling for a lesser prize money as long as none of the other event winners are getting more, so I also explained that it wasn’t just them, but all the events and all the societies were affected by this.

I used sponsor vouchers worth double the amount initial promised as a substitute for cash prizes which were (There were many voucher left unused because the financial team couldn’t use them to pay for logistical expenses. I negotiated with the team to give me sponsor vouchers. 

Most people dont participate for the monetary value of money. They quiz because they enjoy the activity, and the prize is just a recognition of their achievements. I asked our publicity teams to highlight the winners the the news of the festivals.

R: Most teams appreciated our gestures and were satisfied with the vouchers. It helped that most quiz societies in other colleges functioned under a similar structure so they could relate to our problems. In fact, I developed good relationships with many of them and they remain friends to this day.


In 2010, as the secretary of the Quiz Society I was responsible for organising quiz events (6) in IIT Delhi's annual cultural festival, each event involving lucrative cash prizes. However, the overall budget was mismanaged by the finance team (outside my purview), and we ended up in a situation where there were no funds available for the prize money promised. As the face of Quizzing Club, I had to ensure that our reputation remains intact. The prizewinners had to be conveyed that there were to be no cash prizes as advertised, in a way that they don’t feel cheated, aggrieved or hard done by. Many winners were from other quiz societies; it was important to maintain good relations with them. I wrote to each team individually, congratulating them, being fully transparent about what had happened and QuizSoc’s predicament, and explaining that it wasn’t just them that was affected by this. People usually care about fairness more than reward, so most participants were fine with settling for a lesser prize as long as others were in the same boat.  I used sponsor vouchers worth more than the original prize amount as a substitute for cash prizes, and highlighted the winners in event reports. (One reason for no funding was that sponsors paid us in vouchers instead of cash). Most teams didn't actually care as much about money as about recognition, so they appreciated our gestures.  I developed good relationships with many of the winners and they remain friends to this day.


Quizzing Club Women Participation (Skills: Leadership, Innovative Solution to a Problem, Persuasion) (Tell me about a challenge that you had to overcome. Leadership (managing project teams as well as relationships with senior leaders)

S: I was secretary of the Quiz Society at IIT Delhi. Each event would see around 100 people, yet the ratio of guys to females would be about 20:1.  

Task: We had to solve this problem. I had to look at the reasons why we saw such a low participation from girls, and come up with a solution. 

Females used to see it as male dominated elitist society where the chips are against them from the start.
They also suffered from a lack of confidence
This greater a self reinforcing negative feedback loop where people who were new would adopt the same attitudes because they didn’t have good role models to look at. 
I had to change the perception of the club from a male dominated elitist one to a club which is open friendly and well represented one.

A: To change the perception, I started a few events that would be have female quizmasters. It gave them more visibility, and also the competitions couldn’t then said to be biased. The quizzes with female quizmasters not only saw increased participation from women, but from all across the board!
To solve the problem of confidence, I held an mixed team only event where you could enter only if you had a female in your team. This gave an incentive to the regulars to actively go out and persuade their friends to join in/. 
I had a chick flick round in the movie quiz!
I started sending individual invites. 
Once these policies were put in, the negative feedback loop was broken. In fact, it created a positive feedback loop.

R: The ratio, by the time I left, was close to 5:1. Still a lot of work to be done, but the student ratio in IIT Delhi itself was 8:1, so we had achieved something.



S: I was the organiser of the University Challenge team. The source of conflict was that the college had many good candidates, but the spaces on the first team were limited, and everybody wanted to be on the team. There were around 10 people interested, but only 3 spots on the team. 
A straightforward resolution of the conflict would be that you test everyone individually, and the four highest scorers get on the team. Few people could argue against a strict meritocracy.

There were two problems with this:
1.The best team is usually not composed of four individual good quizzers, but on complementaraty. Someone may just just score 5/20, but if those 5 answers are those which no one else can answer, he adds more to the team than a guy who scores 10 but those 10 are ones which others member can answer.
2.The way University Challenge works is that a team is selected not strictly based on the scores, but also on how ‘interesting’ your team is. So if your team represents diversity then you have a better shot. So we were to prioritise candidates with background which are not usually represented, like females or minority ethnic backgrounds, provided they satisfied a certain benchmark.

A: First, I had to make sure that even though there were conflict within prospective candidates, that everyone felt that I was liked by everyone,  that everyone liked me. (By being genuinely interested in everyone’s background, by talking to each and everyone individually) Instead of being on no-one’s side, I wanted everyone to think that I was on everyone’s side. I wanted everyone to believe that I had the group’s best interest at heart. 

Second, I got a person who had already been on University Challenge (and who was not allowed) on board. She knew about the ins and out of the workings of UC selections, so she had authority on how the team should be formed.

The two of thus made the decision, and we explained our rationale to everyone, and we were extremely couteous to everyone who didn’t make it and told them how they’d be perfect the next time around. We made sure that we always maintained an atmosphere of joviality and humour in all our emails and meeting, because once people start taking things too seriously, then the a conflict becomes very likely.

We also made sure that those who didn’t make it were invited to all practice sessions so that they didn’t feel left-out.


CONFLICT MANAGEMENT

“Tell us about a time you saw a conflict coming.”

They want to see you can recognize and manage confrontations. They want to know you can handle difficult situations in a constructive manner.

- Describe how you recognized the conflict, and how you immediately began to resolve it.
- Talk about how effective your technique was in constructively dissolving the tension.
- Comment on how going through this conflict made the team stronger.
“What steps did you take pre-emptively to resolve the conflict?”
“Did anyone else see it coming?”
“How did you manage the resolution following the conflict?”
“What impact did this have on team morale?”