

"What *logic* is there in going for..." (*coughs*) "what is it, yes yes, in going for Philosophy, Politics and Economics, after having studied Maths and Computer Science?" The interviewer, an Oxford alumni in his late 50s, puts my application down, and gives me a piercing look.

I hesitate. I was expecting such a question, but not in those words. I think it was the word *logic* that had put me off, as if implying that I didn't think rationally. But I was a student of Mathematics; I worshipped *logic*.

"I believe these fields are but mere human constructions. Nature doesn't compartmentalize knowledge." I blurt out.

The other interviewer, who I'd thought to be in a slumber, is now suddenly attentive. Both are now looking at me with utmost curiousity.  I shoudn't have said that. I should have held my calm.

"I mean, if we carve out the world into categories like that, and restrict people in those categories, then we tend to lose out on a lot.  For example,  Kahnemann wasn't really an economist. He was a student of psychology. And now he's got the Nobel Prize in Economics for work which only a person with his background could have come up with. I believe, sir, that interdisciplinary migrations do not just catalyse, but play a central role in the birth of new ideas."

Their body language is negative. They are shaking their heads. Maybe I should have remained quiet.

"But we still don't see the rationale. It's not even a PhD degree. It's a second BA. Why would a product of the IITs go for a degree like PPE? I'm afraid we... "

Rationale? No Rationale? I had poured my heart and soul out in my 1000 word personal essay, explaining, with perfectly sound logic, how this course and me were made for each other. I wasn't going to repeat any of that. And what did 'product of IITs' really mean? They were objectifying me, and I was having none of it.

"With all due respect sir", I interject,  "Louise de Broglie was no Phd student either. Einstein was a patent clerk, when he had his *Annus Mirabillis*. And no one ever told Adam Smith, that No, you're a politican and a moral philosopher - I'm afraid we.... we can't let you produce a work of economics."

...(*pause*)

"My point is, the whole notion of degrees has been created to facilitate, and not restrict, learning"

...*even longer pause*

...*shuffling of papers*

The first interviewer now seems to have given up on me. He files the papers back in the folder, and slumps back in his chair.

"Maybe we should ask him something else". The other interviewer, who hadn't said anything uptil now, breaks the awkward silence.

"Tell us, why did you take up game theory in college?"

I'd seen *A Beautiful Mind*, and it had sounded cool. But what do I tell them? 

"While I do like the aesthetic appeal of pure maths, game theory was like maths applied on real people. In that way, it retained the elegance of pure maths, while having a practical component as well. And I found the open questions I came across in my thesis research really fascinating."

"Well, your research doesn't really seem useful..." added the 

This was turning out to be a slow-moving car crash...

"What use is a newborn baby?" I was stealing from Faraday here, but who cared? It wasn't that any of my own answers were working. I pause just the right amount, and then deliver the punchline.

"It's interesting, it's exciting, and it might grow into something great. You never know." 


"Tell us what you loved about your research." The now-fully-awake .. was really trying to help me, help myself. 

To be frank, I had absolutely hated working on my final year thesis. I loved it only after it was over, that is, in hindsight. Which, I guess, was better to have not-had anything to hate or love at all. 

"It was pretty thrilling. It was like a quest for gold in the dark. And with invisible obstacles here and there. Some of these obstacles are walls which you can never cross. But you don't know it then. You have to work it out, by using the things in your arsenal to  And how I followed little cues and hints in overcoming them determined how much gold I'd have gathered"

Both of them are now gaping at me, as if I were from another planet. Maybe I should refrain from talking in metaphors.
